Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response 
23 March 2006 
 
 
In our issue of 15 December 2005 we published a news article that compared the 
Internet offerings of Encyclopaedia Britannica and Wikipedia on scientific topics 
(“Internet encyclopaedias go head to head”, Nature 438 (7070) p900-901; 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/438900a). Encyclopaedia Britannica has now posted 
a lengthy response to this article on its website, accusing Nature of misrepresentation, 
sloppiness and indifference to scholarly standards, and calling on us to retract our 
article. We reject those accusations, and are confident our comparison was fair.  
 
Our original article made clear the basis of our comparison.  Conducted by our news 
staff, it consisted of asking independent scholars to review 50 pairs of articles from 
the Wikipedia and Encyclopaedia Britannica websites. The reviewers were not 
informed which of their pair of articles came from which source; the subjects of the 
articles were chosen in advance to represent a wide range of scientific disciplines. Our 
staff compiled lists of factual errors, omissions and misleading statements that the 
reviewers pointed to (we had 42 usable responses) and tallied up the total number for 
each encyclopaedia: 123 for Britannica, 162 for Wikipedia. Turning the reviewers’ 
comments into numerical scores did require a modicum of judgement, which was 
applied diligently and fairly.  
 
Britannica’s general objections to this article were first made to us in private some 
months ago, at which point we willingly sent them every comment by a reviewer that 
served as the basis for our assessing something as an inaccuracy. While we were quite 
willing to discuss the issues, the company failed to provide specific details of its 
complaints when we asked for them in order to be able to assess its allegations. We 
did not receive any further correspondence until the publication of its open letter on 
22 March 2006. It is regrettable that Britannica chose to make its objections public 
without first informing us of them and giving us a chance to respond. 
 
The company claims that our article gave a misleading impression of Encyclopaedia 
Britannica’s accuracy. Specifically, the company objects to our headline, which says 
that Wikipedia “comes close” to Encyclopaedia Britannica in its coverage of 
scientific topics. We feel this was a reasonable characterization, and the full figures 
featured prominently in the text of the article. The company also objects to the fact 
that in some cases we took material from Britannica’s Book of the Year and its 
Student Encyclopedia. This was done in a few cases when the Britannica website 
provided articles from these sources when queried on the pre-determined topics; as we 
said, the survey compared the content of the websites. In a small number of cases, to 
ensure comparable lengths, we provided reviewers with chosen excerpts, not full 
articles; this was done with entries from both Encyclopaedia Britannica and 
Wikipedia. 
 
In one instance Britannica alleges that we provided a reviewer with material that was 
not from the Britannica website. We have checked and are confident that this was not 
the case.  
 

Britannica objects that Nature did not check the assertions of its reviewers. This is 
true; nor did we claim to. We realised that in some cases our reviewers’ criticisms 
would be open to debate, and in some cases might be wrong.  But this applied as 
much to criticisms of Wikipedia as of Encyclopaedia Britannica. Because the 
reviewers were blind to the source of the material they were evaluating, and material 
from both sources was treated the same way, there is absolutely no reason to think 
that any errors they made would have systematically altered the results of our inquiry.  
 
We note that Britannica has taken issue with less than half the points our reviewers 
raised. Both encyclopaedias have made corrections to some of the relevant entries 
since our article was published.  
 
We do not intend to retract our article.  

